Merge pull request #73 from DanNixon/SINE2020_2 (#73)
DanNixon/sine2020_software_guidelines_paper: guidelines_for_collaborative_development_of_sustainable_data_treatment_software.tex

 Age of project (years)          & 9 & 11 & 21 & 10 & 15 \\
 Number of full time developers in 2018 & 3 & 20 & 1 & $\le$2 & $\le$2 \\
 Current number of contributors  &  & 85  & 9 & 6 & 16 \\
 Total number of contributors    &  & 194 & 47 & 11 & 69 \\
 Developer locations             & 1 & >4 & >3 & 1 & 9 \\
 License                         & GPL3 & GPL3 & GPL2 & GPL3 & BSD \\
 Governance model                & None & PMB \& AC  & None & AC & PMB \\
 Release cycles (per year)       & a few & 3 & 1 & 1 & 1\\
 User documentation              & Tutorials. Examples. & Manual. Tutorials. & Manual. & Manual. Video tutorial & Manual. Tutorials. \\
 Hosting         & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub \\
 Issue tracker   & Redmine & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub & JIRA \& GitHub \\
 Python interface & Yes & Yes & U.D. & U.D. & Yes \\
 Primary programming language & C++ & Python / C++ & C & C++ & Python \\
 GUI framework    & Qt & Qt & None & Qt & Qt \\  
 Plotting library & Matplotlib & Matplotlib & ?? & QtChart & Matplotlib \\ 
 \end{tabular}
 \caption{Key parameters and analysis for the different software projects participating at the end of WP10 SINE2020. 

>  Current and total number of contributors are obtained from the Black Duck Open Hub service \cite{BlackDuck}.

Author: ```suggestion
```

 Age of project (years)          & 9 & 11 & 21 & 10 & 15 \\
 Number of full time developers in 2018 & 3 & 20 & 1 & $\le$2 & $\le$2 \\
 Current number of contributors  &  & 85  & 9 & 6 & 16 \\
 Total number of contributors    &  & 194 & 47 & 11 & 69 \\
 Developer locations             & 1 & >4 & >3 & 1 & 9 \\
 License                         & GPL3 & GPL3 & GPL2 & GPL3 & BSD \\
 Governance model                & None & PMB \& AC  & None & AC & PMB \\
 Release cycles (per year)       & a few & 3 & 1 & 1 & 1\\
 User documentation              & Tutorials. Examples. & Manual. Tutorials. & Manual. & Manual. Video tutorial & Manual. Tutorials. \\
 Hosting         & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub \\
 Issue tracker   & Redmine & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub & JIRA \& GitHub \\
 Python interface & Yes & Yes & U.D. & U.D. & Yes \\
 Primary programming language & C++ & Python / C++ & C & C++ & Python \\
 GUI framework    & Qt & Qt & None & Qt & Qt \\  
 Plotting library & Matplotlib & Matplotlib & ?? & QtChart & Matplotlib \\ 
 \end{tabular}
 \caption{Key parameters and analysis for the different software projects participating at the end of WP10 SINE2020. 

>  Current and total number of contributors and lines of codes (LOC) are obtained from the Black Duck Open Hub service \cite{BlackDuck}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Current and total number of contributors are obtained from the Black Duck Open Hub service \cite{BlackDuck}.
```

PMB = Project Management Board. 
AC = Advisory Committee.

> kLOC = lines of code in thousands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The main guidelines are presented below with references to the relevant section of this paper for further reading.

\begin{itemize}
      \item Use an Open Source license approved by the Open Source Initiative, such as GPL.
      \item Support multiple operation systems.
      \item Design software to be modular.
      \item Use the programming languages C++ and/or Python.
      \item Where the software uses a GUI, use Qt.
      \item Support community standards for data format where such exists, specifically loading of NeXus/HDF5 data formats where relevant.
      \item Use Git for version control of source code, including user and developer documentation.
      \item Use a issue/ticketing system, such as Github issues.
      \item Use a tool for continuous integration and automated testing, such as Travis-CI and Jenkins.
      \item Follow a coding standard and use tools that enforces this, such as Pylint (Python) and ClangFormat (C++).
\end{itemize}

> These guidelines contain recommendations for the technologies that should be used (e.g., C++ and Python for programming languages), based on what is currently available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These guidelines contain recommendations for the technologies that should be used (e.g. C++ and Python for programming languages), based on what is currently available.
```

Hence, the guidelines should be reviewed and updated regularly to ensure that the best available technological solutions are used.
Sharing the technology allows code to be developed that can easily be shared amongst collaborating projects.

The guidelines that have been developed for WP10 of SINE2020 have been used by a wide variety of software projects, see Table \ref{summaryTable} for more details.
However, the guidelines were developed from an analysis of the participating projects and significant commonalities were identified.
This was despite the variations in the size, scope and applications of the participating projects. 

\begin{sidewaystable}
 \begin{tabular}{llllll}
 Software                        & BornAgain \cite{bornagain}  & Mantid \cite{mantid} & McStas \cite{mcstas}  & ImagingSuite \cite{ImagingSuite} & SasView \cite{sasview} \\

>  Application                     & multilayer scaterring calculation & Data reduction and some analysis & Instrument simulations & Neutron imaging software & Analysis of SANS data \\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Application                     & Multilayer scattering calculation & Data reduction and some analysis & Instrument simulations & Neutron imaging & Analysis of SANS data \\
```

U.D. = Under Development.}
\label{summaryTable}
\end{sidewaystable}

Some of the projects have a large numbers of developers and/or are based at multiple locations.
As a result the management overheads (e.g., project management boards) are greater to ensure a uniform standard across the project.
The projects with less developers tend to have less management overheads as it is easier to make decisions across the whole team.
This is a good example of how guidelines should be adapted to match the needs of the project.

Table \ref{summaryTable} contains some details about how plotting is utilised in the projects, which was not considered in the above guidelines.
It is vital for data treatment software to provide a visual representation of the data to the user.
Hence, it is worth adding a recommended plotting module to the guidelines.
As can be seen from Table \ref{summaryTable} MatPlotLib is a common choice.
This is in part due to a large active developer community, which facilitates its long term sustainability. 
MatPlotLib also has good integration with Qt, Python prompt and Jupyter notebook making it a natural choice given previous recommendations. 

> Increasing numbers of new data treatment software projects are using guidelines to ensure a high quality and positive user experience.

Reviewer: This needs rewritten, I think this is typing to say other software projects use guidelines and benefit from it. The current sentence attributes this to us *way* more than it should.

Author: Im not sure how else to say it. Do you have any suggestions?

Author: how about

```suggestion
New data treatment software projects have developed their own guidelines to ensure a high quality and positive user experience.
```

Reviewer: Yes, this should also be a new paragraph I think as it doesn't follow on from the stuff regarding Matplotlib.

\todo{mention scientific coordination?}

\section{Guidelines for development of data treatment software for neutron scattering and muon spectroscopy}
\label{SINE2020}

This section describes guidelines specific to the development of data treatment software for the neutron and muon communities.
The specific guidelines in this section may not be suitable for other communities.

For Work Package 10 (WP10) of SINE2020, a report was written on the standards and guidelines for the participating software /cite{sine2020_wp10_d10_report}. 
The software that participated in WP10 of SINE2020 are BornAgain \cite{bornagain}, Mantid \cite{mantid}, McStas \cite{mcstats}, MuhRec / KipTool \cite{ImagingSuite}, and SasView \cite{sasview}.
The report contains the questionnaires, statistics and information collected from these pieces of software.
For example, the report includes a summery of the commonalities between the participating software.
The below list presents a summery of the main guidelines from the report. 

\begin{itemize}
      \item Use an Open Source license approved by the Open Source Initiative, such as GPL.

>       \item Support multiple operation systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item Support multiple operating systems.
```

      \item Design software to be modular.
      \item Use the programming languages C++ and/or Python.
      \item Where the software uses a GUI, use Qt.
      \item Support community standards for data format where such exists, specifically loading of NeXus/HDF5 data formats where relevant.

>       \item Use Git for version control of source code, including user and developer documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item Use Git for source code management, including user and developer documentation.
```

 Application                     & Multilayer scattering calculation & Data reduction and some analysis & Instrument simulations & Neutron imaging & Analysis of SANS data \\
 Age of project (years)          & 9 & 11 & 21 & 10 & 15 \\
 Number of full time developers in 2018 & 3 & 20 & 1 & $\le$2 & $\le$2 \\
 Current number of contributors  &  & 85  & 9 & 6 & 16 \\
 Total number of contributors    &  & 194 & 47 & 11 & 69 \\
 Developer locations             & 1 & >4 & >3 & 1 & 9 \\
 License                         & GPL3 & GPL3 & GPL2 & GPL3 & BSD \\
 Governance model                & None & PMB \& AC  & None & AC & PMB \\
 Release cycles (per year)       & a few & 3 & 1 & 1 & 1\\
 User documentation              & Tutorials. Examples. & Manual. Tutorials. & Manual. & Manual. Video tutorial & Manual. Tutorials. \\
 Hosting         & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub \\
 Issue tracker   & Redmine & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub & JIRA \& GitHub \\
 Python interface & Yes & Yes & U.D. & U.D. & Yes \\
 Primary programming language & C++ & Python / C++ & C & C++ & Python \\
 GUI framework    & Qt & Qt & None & Qt & Qt \\  

>  Plotting module & MatPlotLib & MatPlotLib & ?? & QtChart & MatPlotLib \\ 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Plotting module & Matplotlib & Matplotlib & ?? & QtChart & Matplotlib \\ 
```

 \end{tabular}
 \caption{Key parameters and analysis for the different software projects participating at the end of WP10 SINE2020. 
 Current and total number of contributors and lines of codes (LOC) are obtained from the Black Duck Open Hub service \cite{BlackDuck}.
PMB = Project Management Board. 
AC = Advisory Committee.
kLOC = lines of code in thousands.
U.D. = Under Development.}
\label{summaryTable}
\end{sidewaystable}

Some of the projects have a large numbers of developers and/or are based at multiple locations.
As a result the management overheads (e.g., project management boards) are greater to ensure a uniform standard across the project.
The projects with less developers tend to have less management overheads as it is easier to make decisions across the whole team.
This is a good example of how guidelines should be adapted to match the needs of the project.

> Table \ref{summaryTable} contains some details about how plotting is utilised in the projects, which was not considered in the above guidelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Table \ref{summaryTable} contains some details about how plotting is used in the projects, which was not considered in the above guidelines.
```

It is vital for data treatment software to provide a visual representation of the data to the user.
Hence, it is worth adding a recommended plotting module to the guidelines.

> As can be seen from Table \ref{summaryTable} MatPlotLib is a common choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As can be seen from Table \ref{summaryTable} Matplotlib is a common choice.
```

This is in part due to a large active developer community, which facilitates its long term sustainability. 

> MatPlotLib also has good integration with Qt, Python prompt and Jupyter notebook making it a natural choice given previous recommendations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Matplotlib also has good integration with Qt, Python prompt and Jupyter notebook making it a natural choice given previous recommendations. 
```

\todo{mention scientific coordination?}

\section{Guidelines for development of data treatment software for neutron scattering and muon spectroscopy}
\label{SINE2020}

> 

Author: I think these first two lines are important to set the scene

> The report \cite{sine2020_wp10_d10_report} contains the standards and guidelines that were developed and used for WP10 of SINE2020. 

Author: ```suggestion
For Work Package 10 (WP10) of SINE2020, a report was written on the standards and guidelines for participating software /cite{sine2020_wp10_d10_report}.

The report \cite{sine2020_wp10_d10_report} contains the standards and guidelines that were developed and used for WP10 of SINE2020. 
```

> The guidelines are based on an analysis of the programs BornAgain, Mantid, McStas, MuhRec / KipTool, and SasView, and the report contains questionnaires, statistics and information about these programs including tables identifying commonality in the beginning of the SINE2020 project.

Author: ```suggestion
The software that participated in WP10 of SINE2020 are BornAgain, Mantid, McStas, MuhRec / KipTool, and SasView.
The report contains the questionnaires, statistics and information collected from these pieces of software.
For example, the report includes a summery of the commonalities between the participating software.
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
The below list presents a summery of the main guidelines from the report, along with references to the appropriate section. 
```

> The main guidelines are presented below with references to the relevant section of this paper for further reading.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> \begin{itemize}

Author: we dont have the relevant sections in the list. We should either not say it in the line above or provide it here

      \item Use an Open Source license approved by the Open Source Initiative, such as GPL.
      \item Support multiple operation systems.
      \item Design software to be modular.
      \item Use the programming languages C++ and/or Python.
      \item Where the software uses a GUI, use Qt.
      \item Support community standards for data format where such exists, specifically loading of NeXus/HDF5 data formats where relevant.

>       \item Use Git for version control of source code including for user and developer documentation.

Author: ```suggestion
      \item Use Git for version control of source code, including user and developer documentation.
```

>       \item Use a issue/ticketing system; such as Github issues.

Author: ```suggestion
      \item Use a issue/ticketing system, such as Github issues.
```

to be consistent

>       \item Use a tool for continuous integration and automated testing; such as Travis-CI and Jenkins.

Author: ```suggestion
      \item Use a tool for continuous integration and automated testing, such as Travis-CI and Jenkins.
```

>       \item Follow a coding standard and use tools that enforces this; such as Pylint (Python) and ClangFormat (C++).

Author: ```suggestion
      \item Follow a coding standard and use tools that enforces this, such as Pylint (Python) and ClangFormat (C++).
```

\end{itemize}

> We consider the guidelines to be both realistic and pragmatic because they are based on existing practise in the aforementioned five software projects, which are rather diverse, but also have enough commonalities to form the basis for the guidelines. 

Author: I think this section needs restructuring.

 Current number of contributors  &  & 85  & 9 & 6 & 16 \\
 Total number of contributors    &  & 194 & 47 & 11 & 69 \\
 Developer locations             & 1 & >4 & >3 & 1 & 9 \\

>  kLOC &  & 2450 & 2968 & 777 & 242 \\

Reviewer: See https://github.com/DanNixon/sine2020_software_guidelines_paper/pull/72

 License                         & GPL3 & GPL3 & GPL2 & GPL3 & BSD \\
 Governance model                & None & PMB \& AC  & None & AC & PMB \\
 Release cycles (per year)       & a few & 3 & 1 & 1 & 1\\
 User documentation              & Tutorials. Examples. & Manual. Tutorials. & Manual. & Manual. Video tutorial & Manual. Tutorials. \\
 Hosting         & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub \\
 Issue tracker   & Redmine & GitHub & GitHub & GitHub & JIRA \& GitHub \\
 Python interface & Yes & Yes & U.D. & U.D. & Yes \\
 Primary programming language & C++ & Python / C++ & C & C++ & Python \\
 GUI framework    & Qt & Qt & None & Qt & Qt \\  
 Plotting module & MatPlotLib & MatPlotLib & ?? & QtChart & MatPlotLib \\ 
 \end{tabular}
 \caption{Key parameters for the different software projects analyzed in SINE2020 at the end. 

>  Current and total number of contributors and lines of codes (LOC) are obtained from the Black Duck Open Hub service \cite{BlackDuck}.

Reviewer: These numbers are wrong, you are quoting different values for each project (e.g. Mantid is total lines and SasView is code lines). But as I mentioned it is a pointless metric anyway.

Reviewer: Also you only need to look at the list of contributors reported by Open Hub to see this is not an accurate metric (duplicate entries, only comm it based contributions counted).

Reviewer: The individual Open Hub pages should be cited with dates too since this is time dependent information.

Author: could you add it please?

Reviewer: @thomasholmrod Should add this as I couldn't find all projects on OpenHub. Also see my above comments, I don't think including this actually conveys useful information.
